2016-09-02
==========

:date: 2016-09-02 18:00
:modified: 2016-09-02
:tags: rstp
:category: work
:summary: Some notes from today

Today
-----

I am continuing to research |rstp|
in an effort to produce a design guide at work.
I started the guide and realized I don't know as much as I
thought about |rstp|.

|stp|, |rstp|'s predicessor was originally defined in IEEE 802.1D.
|rstp| was initially defined in IEEE 802.1w. However, IEEE 802.1w was 
incorporated into the 2004 version of IEEE 802.1D. |stp| was removed from 
IEEE 802.1D-2004.

I printed out the IEEE 802.1D-2004 standard and have begun reviewing it.
This is one that is going to take a few readings to fully understand.
I am trying to keep notes as I go through it.

IEEE 802.1D-2004
----------------

|rstp| is defined in Clause 17 of IEEE 802.1D-2004. Item i) in 17.1 is 
interesting. It states "In normal operation, the time taken to configure the
active topology of a network comprising point-to-point LANs is independent of 
the timer values of the protocol.". I am curious what "normal operation" 
referrs to.

Clause 17.2 referrs to Clause 7.12.3 which defines the Group MAC Address
that identifies the Spanning Tree Protocol. This MAC address is called as
the **Bridge Group Address** and is defined as 01-80-C2-00-00-00. This adress
is a Multicast Ethernet Address because the least-significant bit of the first
octet is a 1.

Port States
~~~~~~~~~~~

Clause 17.3 references Clause 7.4 to define the port states controlled by 
|rstp|. The port states defined by IEEE 802.1D-2004 are:

Discarding
    Any port that is not enabled or has been dynamically excluded from 
    forwarding and learning from MAC frames.
Learning
    Any port where Learning is enabled for Forwarding is disabled.
Forwarding
    Any port that both learns and forwards frames.

Priority Vectors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Clause 17.3 references Clause 17.5 to define |rstp| Priority Vectors.
The Priority Vector is the information sent by each switch when selecting
the Root Bridge and the shortest path to it. Priority Vectors contain the 
following information:

Root Bridge Identifier
    The Bridge Identifier of the Bridge believed to be the Root by the 
    transmitter.
Root Path Cost
    Path cost from the transmitting Bridge what is believed to be the Root 
    Bridge.
Bridge Identifier
    Bridge Identifier of the transmitting Bridge
Port Identifier
    Port through which the message was transmitted
Port Identifier
    Port through which the message was received (where relevant)


Port Roles
~~~~~~~~~~

.. warning::
   This section will need more development as I get further into this.
   See the **WTF?** items.

Clause 17.3 references Clause 17.7 to define the port roles. The Port Roles
defined by IEEE 802.1D-2004 are:

Disabled Port
    Port is disabled if it is not operational or if it is excluded from the
    active topology by management. This can occur if the MAC_Operational status
    is False, if it is disabled by 802.1X, or if it is disabled by the 
    administrator.
Root Port
    The source of the root priority vector is the Root Port on every bridge
    except the Root Bridge. The Root Bridge does not have a Root Port. This is
    the one port on the Bridge that provides the lowest cost path to the 
    Root Bridge.
Designated Port
    Port whose port priority vector is its designated priority vector 
    (**WTF?**). This is the one port attached to each LAN that provides the 
    lowest cost path from that LAN to the Root Bridge. 
Alternate Port
    Port (not including the Root Port) whose priority vector has been received
    from another Bridge is an Alternate Port (**WTF?**). Ports that can provide
    connectivity if other network components fail.
Backup Port
    Port that has a priority vector that has been received from another port
    on this Bridge (**WTF?**). Ports that can provide connectivity if other 
    network components fail.

Edge Ports
~~~~~~~~~~

Bridge ports attached to a LAN that has no other Bridges attached to it
may be administratively configured as an Edge Port. Edge Ports transition
directly to the Forwarding Port State since there is no possibility of it 
participating in a loop.

Conclusion
----------

I made it Clause 17.3.2 which contains example topologies. I will be studying
this over the weekend.


.. |rstp| replace:: :abbr:`RSTP (Rapid Spanning Tree Protocol)`
.. |stp| replace:: :abbr:`STP (Spanning Tree Protocol)`
